Add The Things Fundamentals (#448)
TheThingsNetwork/docs: doc/content/lorawan/architecture/_index.md

---
title: LoRaWAN Architecture
section: The Things Fundamentals
weight: 30
---

> LoRaWAN is a media access control (MAC) protocol for wide area networks. It is designed to allow low-powered devices to communicate with Internet-connected applications over long range wireless connections. LoRaWAN can be mapped to the second and third layer of the OSI model. It is implemented on top of LoRa or FSK modulation in industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) radio bands. The LoRaWAN protocols are defined by the LoRa Alliance and formalized in the LoRaWAN Specification which can be downloaded on the LoRa Alliance website.

Reviewer: add the download link

* **[Network Server]({{< relref "../../network" >}})** - servers that route messages from End Devices to the right Application, and back.

* **[Application]({{< relref "../../Applications" >}})** - a piece of software, running on a server.

> End devices communicate with nearby gateways and each gateway is connected to the network server. LoRaWAN networks use an ALOHA based protocol, so end devices don’t need to peer with specific gateways. Messages sent from end devices travel through all gateways within range. Message deduplication is handled by the network server.

Reviewer: Add a sentence to shortly explain the application role

Let’s examine each element in detail.

### End devices

> A LoRaWAN end device could be a sensor, an actuator, or both. They are often battery operated. These end devices are wirelessly connected to the LoRaWAN network through gateways using LoRa RF modulation. The following figure shows a LoRaWAN end device which is a water meter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A LoRaWAN end device could be a sensor, an actuator, or both. They are often battery-operated. These end devices are wirelessly connected to the network through gateways using LoRaWAN protocol. The following figure shows an example of a LoRaWAN-enabled end device - [NAS LoRaWAN water meter sensor](https://www.nasys.no/product/lorawan-water-meter-sensor/).
```

![alt_text](../end-node.png "End-node")

Figure: A LoRaWAN water meter sensor that can be attached to an existing water meter. Source: https://www.nasys.no/product/lorawan-water-meter-sensor/

Here are some applications for LoRaWAN based end devices.

*   Environmental sensors
*   Pet/animal tracking
*   Vehicle/people tracking
*   Smoke alarms
*   Wireless locks
*   Street lights
*   Water meters with shut-off valves
*   Trash containers

### Gateways

Each gateway is registered to a LoRaWAN network. A gateway receives LoRa modulated RF messages from end devices and simply forwards them to the LoRaWAN network server. Gateways are connected to the internet through an IP backbone. IP traffic from gateway to the network server can be **backhauled** through Cellular (3G/4G/5G), WiFi, Ethernet, Fiber-optic or 2.4 GHz radio links. 

> There are two types of messages that pass through the gateway:

Reviewer: The uplink and downlink messages part kinda doesn't belong here in the middle of explaining the architecture

### Uplink messages

Uplink messages are sent by end devices to the network server and relayed by all gateways within reach. Gateways demodulate the received RF messages into IP traffic. Gateways also check the integrity of received messages and forward metadata such as the gateway location and received time to the network server. Each uplink message sent by the end device will be received by all gateways within reach, and deduplicated by the network server.

### Downlink messages

Each downlink message is sent by the network server to only one end device and is relayed by a single gateway. The gateway modulates the received IP data packets into LoRa radio messages.

> When transmitting a downlink message, the network server selects the gateway that received the last uplink message, and if multiple gateways are in range of a device, the network server chooses one based on SNR (see [Glossary](../glossary#snr)) and RSSI (see [Glossary](../glossary#rssi)).

Reviewer: Glossary link doesn't work

### Types of LoRaWAN Gateways

> LoRaWAN gateways can be categorized into indoor (picocell) and outdoor (macrocell) gateways. Indoor gateways provide coverage in difficult-to-reach indoor locations and are therefore suitable for use in homes, businesses and buildings. 

Reviewer: Try separating this to: categorized as indoor or outdoor, or by their range as pico-, micro- and macro-cell.
